README.md, before:

# 3D CT Annotator

A Python-based GUI tool for efficiently annotating 3D landmarks on CT scans using bounding boxes. Designed for medical research data collection.

![Annotator Overview](./assets/overview.png)

## Features
- **Multi-View Interface**: AP, Lateral, and MPR (Axial, Coronal, Sagittal) views.
- **Smart Navigation**: Quickly switch between patients and landmarks.
- **Auto-Saving**: Never lose progress; annotations are saved automatically when moving to the next landmark.
- **Modifiable History**: Navigate back to previous landmarks to view or correct your submissions.
- **Z-Axis Locking**: Guides align across views to ensure accurate 3D positioning.

## Installation

1.  **Clone the repository**:
    ```bash
    git clone <repository-url>
    cd 3D-annotator
    ```

2.  **Install Dependencies**:
    Ensure you have Python installed. Then run:
    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```
    *(Requires: `numpy`, `matplotlib`, `nibabel`, `tkinter`)*

## Setup Data

The tool expects NIfTI files (`.nii.gz`) in the `data` directory.

1.  Create a `data` folder in the project root if it doesn't exist.
2.  Place your CT scan files inside:
    ```
    3D-annotator/
    ├── data/
    │   ├── case001_ct.nii.gz
    │   └── case002_ct.nii.gz
    ├── src/
    │   └── annotator.py
    ```

## Step-by-Step Guide

1.  **Launch the Application**:
    ```bash
    python src/annotator.py
    ```

2.  **Login**:
    - Enter your **Resident Name** in the "User Info" box. This is required to save data.

3.  **Annotate**:
    - Select a landmark from the dropdown or use the **Next LM** button.
    - **AP View**: Click and drag to draw a bounding box around the landmark.
    - **Lateral View**: Draw the corresponding box.
    - *Tip: A cyan line will appear to help you align the Z-height between views.*

4.  **Verify**:
    - Click **Visual Check (MPR)** to see the cross-sectional views of your selection.

5.  **Save & Continue**:
    - Click **Next LM** (or **Next Case**) to auto-save your current annotation and move to the next item.
    - If you need to fix a mistake, simply navigate back (`< Prev LM`), redraw the box, and it will update the record.

## Output

Annotations are saved to `annotations.csv` in the project root.

**Format**:
`CaseID, FileName, Resident, LandmarkIdx, LandmarkName, X, Y, Z, AP_Box, Lat_Box`

- **X, Y, Z**: Calculated 3D center of the annotation.
- **AP_Box**: `x_min;x_max;z_min;z_max` (Volume X-axis and Z-axis).
- **Lat_Box**: `y_min;y_max;z_min;z_max` (Volume Y-axis and Z-axis).
     - *Note: Y-axis corresponds to the horizontal axis in the Lateral view.*

---
**Note**: The application uses an "Append-Only" log for safety. If you modify an annotation, a new row is added to the CSV.

Commit message:

Revise README with new project details and features
Updated project description and features in README.

README.md, after:

# 3D CT Annotator 🦴

An annotation tool for localizaing landmarks on CT scans. A user is given two views (AP and Lateral), and asked to add bounding boxes over regions of interest (ROI) in both views. As the views are orthoogonal, we can exactly localize the ROIs in 3D 💀🎯

![Annotator Overview](./assets/overview.png)

## Installation

1.  **Clone the repository**:
    ```bash
    git clone <repository-url>
    cd 3D-annotator
    ```

2.  **Install Dependencies**:
    Ensure you have Python installed. Then run:
    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```
    *(Requires: `numpy`, `matplotlib`, `nibabel`, `tkinter`)*

## Setup Data

The tool expects NIfTI files (`.nii.gz`) in the `data` directory.

1.  Create a `data` folder in the project root if it doesn't exist.
2.  Place your CT scan files inside:
    ```
    3D-annotator/
    ├── data/
    │   ├── case001_ct.nii.gz
    │   └── case002_ct.nii.gz
    ├── src/
    │   └── annotator.py
    ```

## Step-by-Step Guide

1.  **Launch the Application**:
    ```bash
    python src/annotator.py
    ```

2.  **Login**:
    - Enter your **Resident Name** in the "User Info" box. This is required to save data.

3.  **Annotate**:
    - Select a landmark from the dropdown or use the **Next LM** button.
    - **AP View**: Click and drag to draw a bounding box around the landmark.
    - **Lateral View**: Draw the corresponding box.
    - *Tip: A cyan line will appear to help you align the Z-height between views.*

4.  **Verify**:
    - Click **Visual Check (MPR)** to see the cross-sectional views of your selection.

5.  **Save & Continue**:
    - Click **Next LM** (or **Next Case**) to auto-save your current annotation and move to the next item.
    - If you need to fix a mistake, simply navigate back (`< Prev LM`), redraw the box, and it will update the record.

## Output

Annotations are saved to `annotations.csv` in the project root.

**Format**:
`CaseID, FileName, Resident, LandmarkIdx, LandmarkName, X, Y, Z, AP_Box, Lat_Box`

- **X, Y, Z**: Calculated 3D center of the annotation.
- **AP_Box**: `x_min;x_max;z_min;z_max` (Volume X-axis and Z-axis).
- **Lat_Box**: `y_min;y_max;z_min;z_max` (Volume Y-axis and Z-axis).
     - *Note: Y-axis corresponds to the horizontal axis in the Lateral view.*

---
**Note**: The application uses an "Append-Only" log for safety. If you modify an annotation, a new row is added to the CSV.
